yourself and tell their names.
Ok, good afternoon, I'm Mrs Christina Roy.
Today we are going to organize an oral history interview with Mr and Mrs Majumdar for the
Wales Puja Committee for taking the past memories and the history of heritage of Dunga Puja
in Wales.
Good afternoon Mrs Majumdar.
How and when did you get involved in the festival for Wales Puja Committee?
Ok, I think to be honest you don't remember because it's such a long time ago but as far as I remember
I got a phone call one day I think from in Cardiff you know there were two gentlemen Mr Godock
and I think Mr Shambudar all of a sudden they saying that the Boudi I need you, we need your help.
I said what, what sort of help?
My husband was busy at that time you know he was a single handed practitioner he was.
So unfortunately he was not home so I had to answer the phone and everything.
So he said could you please we are going to start the Puja in Cardiff but we need some stuff for the Puja.
Have you got this Kosha Kursi, Chandan Khar, all the Puja thing you know utensils for Puja,
ala shak all these things. So I mentioned whatever I got and decided the date mentioned and all that was fixed anyway.
At that time there was no committee, no meeting, nobody, only few family.
The initial started Mr Godock and Mr Shambudar but they invited few family I think you will know
already you know perhaps Mr and Mrs Kaur, Mr and Mrs Mishra, Dr Animesh Das, Mr Pali, ourself and Dr Boshak.
All these family the only the oldest I think.
And Mr Mishra, Mrs Mishra I told you.
So few family they invited and I think Dr and Mrs Haldar whether they were there as well isn't it Amadari.
So they were involved in the beginning so they few families came and they said that whoever the Bengali or Indian you know you tell them we are doing the Puja.
So instead of family oriented Puja only few families started.
So we didn't know anybody what's going to be like that and all.
So whatever I thought I saw the Puja in our house in India.
My mother or grandmother whatever they used to do in Lokthi Puja or in other Puja, Sharshwati Puja we had in our house, Dugga Puja also in our Desh.
So I remember all the things you know Puja fruits, cuttings and what sort of things we need, five fruits and sweets and things like that.
So that was arranged few people took share the but most of all arranging and telling everybody what to do not to do those two gentlemen was doing.
And we are sort of working but it was nice good experience and we are excited that we are going to have the Puja there.
And we had the Pruthima the first one someone came I can't remember the name the gentleman you might know afterwards.
Mr. Parth.
No she had a picture a painted picture the first one.
I think you might have in our old pictures that that the first Pruthima was painted.
They brought it in parade and we started the Puja there.
What she has done she has jumped few stages.
We hope that couple of other things happen.
Yeah what things happen.
But whatever is in the school and other things then you can't get parade like that.
You have to we did series of places then came the parade.
Excuse me.
Art come again okay.
The same one.
Challenger.
So what were the major challenges you faced while arranging or organizing the Puja around those times.
I think the beginning it was the main factor that when we started finding that you know we spent quite a lot of time in the morning and in the evening time.
The first thing obviously everybody gets hungry.
So food was the main thing factor we get the Prasad fall and fruits and everything.
But gradually we started you know thinking in the evening time a lot of people started coming.
I mean outside Kadi, the Bristol, Newport.
So the audience was coming up.
So then everybody thought the collection was also coming up.
So we thought we better give the order the food and with the few family members we were paying more contribution at that time for the meeting the cost.
So the food was coming and then gradually when the member came quite a lot and we decided to make a formative committee was formed.
The main factor was beginning you know the food that started with that then you need money.
So how to get about that.
So everybody had a decision.
Ask him.
The thing, committee was not formed so easily.
There was always a controversy that one person I don't want to name he doesn't like the committee.
So committee he said no we are doing Puja and we are collecting money everything.
They let the people come and enjoy it and whatever confidence and this is only we will control not the committee.
So were there any issues of money?
Then the some or other that gentleman is gone out.
Then came two other people.
They said yes there is a committee to be formed and specially Dr. Banerjee was came without committee.
So how can you and how you can handle public money and the public has every right to know how you spend that money.
So you will have to give a chart after the Puja and let them see what you have spent.
So everybody thought it was a very rational and reasonable judgment.
So some or other the committee was formed.
And that's it.
So what collecting the money?
What would you think like the money came through?
Did all the members put in the money or was there a policy to get more donations?
We didn't have much money in our fund.
Whatever we got the fund at the end you will see there was always a deficit.
So we managed the deficit ourselves.
So at the end they decided that you better go everybody's house and collect the money.
Initially you can see that who are the people who has much interest in the Puja and come with a much more reverence and what you call bhakti.
They are the people.
They are with us.
So you go first and then you go other people.
So we started.
So we formed a group three or four, four or five and in the car they will go.
And the response was that nearly 50-50.
I don't want to say anymore because few checks are bounced.
So we don't want anymore.
And somebody may say by checkbook I can't see it.
Find any checkbook.
So these are the experience we had.
Somebody said well next another Puja is our Puja that is Navaratri.
Their food is better than yours.
So no.
So these are the experience we had.
And we have to say when you get your checkbook we will come again.
So this is our experience.
But there are people who lavishly give the money without any question.
So there is a two contrast between the two.
Anyway this was the collection started.
But at the end when our fund has grown up gradually and people are coming and coming.
Only 20 people started.
Now there is 50, 60, 70, 80 people.
Then we said we stop collection.
Let them come and whoever like to give money.
Collection of the whole.
Not our whole too.
So we said we should appoint chairman, vice chairman, accountant.
There was a controversy whether you should appoint an accountant.
Some said there is no need.
The treasurer will do the job both.
And you must show that there is account to be shown to the public.
And let the public have the say in the annual general meeting.
Then the conception of the registration of the committee.
Some friends, one or two friends, they started with the solicitor.
And with a discussion with him.
But ultimately it was rejected in the registration of the SINC in Liverpool.
They said it doesn't comply with the regulations and others so it can't be registered.
Then at the time one member of that committee died.
And at his last work to me was that I can't do it and I'm going now in Villander hospital.
So you take the charge and do the registration as you can.
So I said well when you fail how can I do it?
How can I do these things?
Alright. Then I took it.
And he died next day.
Then I thought very much.
Then I went to the Kachisomans.
They registered.
Then the other, those who were registered, I took a note from them.
These are the way to proceed.
And then same solicitor.
Then I invited Dr. Sharma, Kishore Sharma.
And we had a meeting in our house a number of times.
And again we met Mr. Rol, solicitor's name?
Rajavoljab.
He said oh well it can't be done.
I said yes it can be done.
This is the way to go through.
So he had thought about it and then he corrected all the forms and applications and everything.
Then there is a covenant that you got to pay contribution to any earthquake or anything.
You got to show that you have given them.
And you got to show cultural things.
Something cultural going on.
And you must give accountant all accounts.
And then it will be passed.
Then ultimately passed.
Ask a question on the constitution.
I think the constitution is over.
I think we told already about constitution and all the things.
I know the committee was formed after a while.
But did you have to form a new constitution to run the committee?
When this question of charity when arose and deeply we thought about it.
The first important part of the charity in the registered office in Liverpool they will ask the constitution.
So we got to run a constitution.
And as Sandeep has said the meeting was first arranged in our house.
And we started to run up all the clauses and back to the solicitor.
And then we sent to Liverpool for their consideration.
Okay we are starting now.
How do you think Durga Puja and festival has evolved over the period?
As you know a lot of people come from UK and other parts of the country like Middle East and others.
They didn't have much place to go there and offer their offerings to God.
And this is the place they find apart from London, Liverpool, Glasgow they are too far from them.
So they came with their own mind that after all God will bless me if I attend.
And if I get some Sandy waters then it will bring me prosperity in my life.
And that is evolved.
And everybody some friends have gone there and attended the puja.
They liked it very much. They attended Pushpanjali. They attended prasad.
And met so many people, introduced themselves.
And they go back to their place and talk to other friends.
Have you seen all this? Yes. We will also go with you.
This is the way it evolved.
So what do you think brought the group together and were able to hold together now?
Like how it's been able to sustain till now?
Because the group has developed a confidence and strength in their mind.
That after all the God is there and God will bring us together.
This is the main thing.
Not that so many people coming introducing ourselves and making friends and go up.
It's not that. It is not seeing the prathima and the image of the prathima.
And all the paraphernalia of the offering and anjuli and then home.
Then the fire after the puja and putting fire on the head.
These all these things evolved and joined together harmoniously rather than anything else.
No criticize to each other. No nothing.
This is the main thing. And after that whatever you think.
Would you like to comment anything about the overall feeling about the festival?
My feeling is that the puja will prosper. You cannot stop. I cannot stop.
It is God who will pull the head and doing everything in their own way.
So that the people come and give their offerings to them.
And she or he will bless us.
That is she is there on the heaven and the couple one day in a ostomy.
And they look at each other what we are doing.
That is the conception people come and offering their medications and everything.
And that is the way people are coming and coming.
And also you can see the other part of this cultural side.
Lot of people like songs. Lot of people like dance.
Lot of people like chandalika and all these things.
They never seen. They said oh in UK I can see. What a great pleasure.
That is the Rabindra Sumi. And not only that.
The puja brings all the big artists from different parts of Calcutta or any other parts.
And they hear their songs. They enjoy themselves.
And that is the cultural side of it.
And not least good food.
Good food. Good food.
Good food to morning and lunch time and night.
That is a great enjoyment.
And all are ready made and hot.
They say oh lovely food we are getting.
That is also attraction. That's it.
Are there any other things which you would like to share?
Yes. Do you want to come back again on it?
So would you like to comment anything else on your overall feelings about the festival within Cardiff?
Yes. I think as I said before you know the first part of how we struggled.
But gradually when we had a lot of members came in.
Youngster got interested.
Then the committee was formed.
Everybody got there.
Took their responsibility doing the framework.
But then one person had to do a lot of things.
So the variety program was nice.
We had a catering officer who looked after the food things.
And doing that obviously is a group activity not individual.
So everybody worked very hard.
I wouldn't say anything on that.
Gradually, gradually it's sort of homership.
The main thing we kept it one thing that we'll do the puja as we have done.
The religious part should be kept.
It wasn't changed.
The religious part was done the same.
But we added doing the cultural program and encouraging the children to take the part.
They also took the responsibility and decorations and all.
Different activity.
They were more interested to take part.
Otherwise they would have been bored.
So those are things gradually, gradually.
People thought how to improve the committee's activity.
Took part in it.
So the youngster came up.
So the older people also took a little bit of the backside.
But they were there to give the advice.
Our collection in the hall came up.
Money came up.
It's nice to see that committee is getting stronger.
People are more interested outside of Cardiff.
I think in Cardiff, people outside of Cardiff when we see the picture in computer.
People phoned from London.
We saw you in the puja.
That's nice to know it's coming up.
And all this.
At that time we think that the Peeve family worked very hard beginning.
That's why we kept the puja going.
It's now rewarding to see the younger generation is following.
Keeping our tradition.
And I hope at least they won't forget about the puja part.
As much as they can.
I know you have to time to time.
With the time you might have to change something.
Perhaps the exact time we can't do.
But as long as we can keep some of the part right.
Then I think people won't lose their interest.
That's the main part of the younger generation now.
To keep it together.
Not to have a division anymore.
What I find myself.
That I always used to tell.
That to be a good committee member.
That you always must think.
That we must agree.
To be.
Not to have a disagreement.
If we agree on that point.
Everybody won't have to be agreeing on all points.
But we have a right to disagree.
Some of the points.
I think we should contribute our comment on that.
Keeping in mind.
That we are all doing voluntary jobs.
It's not a paid job.
So we shouldn't bring any conflict in ourselves.
Whenever we are there.
In the puja committee meeting.
Everybody giving their time free.
Everybody thinking about the puja.
Nobody is paid.
It's not a paid worker.
So nobody blames to everybody.
If somebody's fight is wrong.
Very politely they say.
I would do like that.
Not commenting, criticizing.
And backbiting.
I think that is now we have to think.
That if we want to keep up going on.
Next 20 years.
To what we have done before.
We should learn from our mistakes.
I know we haven't done all correct things.
We have learned from our mistakes.
Every year to year.
How to improve the thing.
How to get the sweet.
How to cut the cost cutting thing.
We started saving money.
Previously we used to pay the money for the caterer.
But a lot of money.
Then the member thought how to collect the money.
So this sort of thing came up.
And now the people are thinking.
They are thinking how to improve.
The youngsters are doing the same thing.
Now the computer age has come.
It's much easier.
Previously we used to pay a lot of phone charges.
Phone call.
We invited people to our own phone call.
So we also paid a lot of money from our own.
But we didn't think about that.
We thought we were doing something.
For our own enjoyment.
And that is I think kept us going on.
Which we I think there were some good days and bad days.
But well at the end you know.
To see Madhurga still in Cardiff.
And now new images being formed.
New image coming up.
Durga Pratima being built.
And the Cardiff all the children.
This country's children also know.
You were all in the same place.
And you were all in the same place.
And the children also know.
You were all working very hard for the school project.
It's nice to see.
I'm sorry we are getting older.
Obviously we can't help physically.
Be there.
But I think we have done our share.
And I think we should leave it to the younger people.
And I always salute.
And I always respect what they are doing.
Because we can't do now much.
So we shouldn't criticize.
But at least we can say time to time.
Whatever we feel better.
Not as advice.
I suggest wise.
That if you feel it will be nice.
Or if I see something going wrong.
I can politely say that.
That liberty should be.
That should be given to the older generation.
I mean younger people think that.
Oh the older they are gone.
We won't take their advice.
That shouldn't be.
That will be for the younger generation part.
That the older generation are there.
If they need some advice they are there to give it.
Because their experience is important.
Whoever may be.
Whoever worked very hard.
I know Mrs. Haldar.
Mrs. Choudhury.
Number 5 and number 11.
What did you say?
Mrs. Haldar and Mrs. Choudhury.
They are the people who were there in the beginning.
They also worked quite hard with us.
So I am sure they will be.
So all the members who are not there.
Dr. Acharjit.
Mrs. Acharya.
Acharya Boudi.
Banerjee. Banerjee Boudi.
All the members who were really in the beginning.
They were quite hard.
Pooja, Sait and Advice and Working.
And Dr. Shingupta passed away.
Who else now our friend.
I think we will mention after.
Dr. Shingupta.
He was our member.
So he worked and he passed away.
So all the members who were there.
Dr. Ganguly was the beginning.
And the member.
Not long he stayed actively.
But he was also the founder member.
One of the.
Mr. Siendars. They were all not actively.
But in the beginning they all passed away.
So we always
remember them.
And whoever did it. Little bit of contribution.
I think we should remember.
I think we all are human beings.
Obviously we will have a different opinion.
Everything.
But at least we will try.
I think we should pray to God.
Pray to God that everybody.
Bengali group.
Not only Bengali group.
All Indian group here.
They will sort of share their views.
And work together. That is the only thing.
That's the way to prosper.
Whatever we are doing.
And we are doing very well.
So I hope we haven't got any
complaints on that.
I hope we will stay few years more to enjoy
your festivities.
And the things you do.
That's all I think.
Thank you.
Would you like to share something else please?
That I would say at the end.
Number 11.
Anything else you would like to talk about.
Number five.
What major
challenges you faced.
While arranging
or organizing puja.
See.
These challenges.
Are really very controversial.
As we are
very old.
And afraid.
And we can't do physically.
Lot of work.
For the puja. Which we did before.
Lot of challenges.
And criticism come.
And.
To say a few words.
What challenges are coming.
Major challenges those who are religious.
And Brahmin.
And doing puja.
They are telling.
Why you allow the widowed
person to do bhoga.
Widow.
That's not our
sastra.
That's not our sastra written.
That they will go. I said look.
Don't criticize this thing.
We are very short of people.
We can't get any people.
And she is religious.
She comes and does these things.
So forget about it.
No we can't forget these things.
Second thing is this.
Again they said.
That they are widowed.
Why you allow in the present.
To touch the.
The all you list.
Ingredients and all the.
Pots and everything.
I said there they came.
They offered their offerings.
So the religious
people also forget about this.
With a mature and intelligent
judgment.
You will have to proceed.
And console them.
That forget these things.
These are.
As long
as all are.
Offering our puja in the same
manner. So let them
do it. They are also human
being. Unfortunately
they are widowed.
So you can't send them. You can't
do it. You just.
Put a white shawl with a black
border and side
one side. Don't touch
any matrimonial
affair. Don't touch it.
Because this is auspicious.
The word auspicious
doesn't come here. So forget
this thing. These are
the preliminary challenge.
We always listen.
And console them.
In a proper way. So
that we could work together.
In a harmonious way.
And sustain these
things. So that we can continue
for long long time.
And now the
11.
Anything else you would like to talk about?
Well
as Krishna you always
you mentioned about the venue.
Venue we
talk time and again.
Some people are willing to
give
quite a bit
of fund to buy
land. But land
is not the only answer.
You will have to prepare the whole
building.
Then comes it.
And there building is
done. Then electricity.
Then rate.
Then the priest
who will where he will stay.
These are all these
things comes in.
And it is a very difficult task.
As we see
in Indian culture there is a priest.
And they have been permanent.
They are. So
all these things are very difficult.
As Sudeep says
the puja
is now
to be making.
So the priest come from
India. They got to
think where they will stay.
Where they will eat.
Where they will. They apart from
their journey from going
from Calcutta to UK
UK to Calcutta back.
All these things.
Suppose they are ill. Who will
stand together
and do all these things.
You got to think lot of things.
So we love to
have some our own venue.
So we can say that
well Pujya Comte has this venue.
We never had to think
separate kitchen.
Separate
venue for the
for the home.
Another kitchen. And the
long waiting room.
And stage where the
cultural function will be held.
Dressing changing room from
one actor to the other actor.
So many things.
So it is not very easy.
Okay.
I am Sandeep
Raha from
Welsh Pujya Committee.
I am the chair of Welsh Pujya Committee at present.
I am at Kamal
and Sikthabodi's house in Cardiff.
Mr. Kamal Ghatok.
Mr. Ghatok
I heard
and know that you were the first
few people starting
Durga Puja in Cardiff.
Can you
tell us how and when
you got involved in the festival
in Durga Puja?
Okay.
Bengali?
This was not Durga Puja
before.
This was
What do you say?
Your Bija Daswami.
I had a friend
and flatmate.
Sumbudas.
He said
that it was not
useful to do all this.
Do Bija Daswami.
It will be good.
He fixed the house.
Mr. Muniram
helped us a lot.
Then
our
Bija Daswami
started
Durga Puja.
First
from Cardiff
from London
from Kolkata
we did Pata Puja.
Then
I was challenged
to be a Thakur.
I had been
a Thakur in many places.
I had
a Saraswati
Kaliba
Durga Puja.
I had all.
You had
a Durga Puja
in your garage.
You had five Pujas.
Madhugga,
Lokhi, Saraswati,
Kartik and Ganesh.
Tell us
how you did it.
How did you do it?
How did you work?
How did you spend time?
I came from the office
and started working.
I had a chillblend.
I went to the
cold water and
had a chillblend.
That didn't go away.
Now I have a chillblend
after I had a chillblend.
The Thakur you made
was made of
mud, mud,
earth, mud,
and you had done it yourself?
Yes.
I did it
with modeling clay.
I used that modeling clay
and did it with Thakur.
Is it all in the film?
I will show you the film.
Do you remember your year?
Which year?
or 1979
No, no, no.
It was
in 1982
when it started.
After 1982
I started
making clay.
Ok.
So in 1982
I was 3-4 years old.
When did you start?
In 1984, 1985, 1986.
Ok.
As far as I remember
I saw your
Pujo in the
Cardiff Parade.
I saw it.
I think it was something like
1988-89.
I saw it.
I was in Cardiff but
Pujo was in Cardiff.
Can you tell who were
the people at that time with you?
Who were the people with you
at that time?
One was Dr. Ravi Sarkar.
He was
Banwadi De
Dr. Asarjo De
Dr. Asarjo
He helped us a lot
during Pujo.
What about
Rama Chaudhary was there?
Rama Chaudhary was there.
Ok.
Later when I left him
Rama Chaudhary took
Bishudaya.
Rama Chaudhary
Pujo was
not a part of Rama Chaudhary.
He was involved in
cultural programs.
He was involved in Pujo
and some other things.
So, in the first 3-4 years
who were you worshiping?
Dr. Asarjo.
Ok.
Then Banarjit came.
He was also a part of
Parade.
He was a part of
Pujo.
Parade.
Where did you worship before Parade?
Before Parade
Dr. Sen
was worshiped
once at Sen's house.
Once a year.
Ok.
Then
I took him to Parade.
Yes.
I was worshiping at Parade.
It was a very successful worship.
It was a year.
Then at the Pujo
you can say it as a teacher
then how did you arrange
food at the Pujo?
Food
was in the kitchen.
I cooked once at Parade
I remember.
Kichdi, Kiki.
All the boys did it.
The girls couldn't do it properly.
There was nothing at the bottom of the Parade.
In the basement.
And the brother-in-law
Dr. Asarjo made sweets.
And
then you
where did you write the Pujo
document?
Yes.
It was
Papu
Debasish
Naelgi.
That was the Kali Pujo.
In Kali Pujo?
The Pujo
was in the basement.
You brought the fruits from the basement?
Flowers, fruits,
from where?
From the basement.
I brought the fruits
from the basement.
And what else?
Pujo
Dinesh Patra.
Was there anything
related to the Basant Patra?
There was something related to the Basant Patra.
Then we gave something.
Then it all happened.
And where did the Pujo money go?
The money for the Moon?
The expenses?
I had
the Parade
where no Pujo was allowed to walk.
I see.
I started
with Hindu culture.
So I thought
what will happen?
I said, I will pay.
I will pay
but
the Moon will not be there.
You see,
during the Pujo
the Moon
was very
difficult to get.
Was the Moon
collected from the house?
No.
It was not collected from the house.
It was given
to whoever gave it.
And
as much as you
remember,
do you remember
any specific event
during the Durga Pujo
that stuck in your mind?
Can you tell us?
I remember
one thing
that I found very bad.
When I made the Pujo
there was a group
of people
who said
that they don't want the Pujo
but they want the Saraswati Pujo
I want the Durga Pujo
but I don't want the Pujo.
That is what I remember.
There is a story.
So I don't
go to the Pujo
I don't go to the Pujo in Kashmir.
That is what
I remember.
That is what I remember.
You were in
Pratima Bani. You made the image
and that image was
worshipped by West Pujo Committee.
West Pujo Committee was not there then.
The name was different.
I know that.
That was worshipped for nearly
6-7 years.
After that
when the first Pratima came
do you know
about it when the first Pratima
came from Kolkata or Kumartudi?
Do you remember?
First
that
Pujo was worshipped here.
Then Thakur came.
Then I made my Thakur.
Then
Thakur came from
the country.
Thakur came from the country.
Then
he gave
my Thakur to Vishwajan.
So that
was the issue.
Your Thakur was Vishwajan's issue.
Yes. He gave my Thakur to Vishwajan.
He didn't ask me.
He didn't ask you?
No.
He didn't ask me anything.
Okay.
This is the
secret of the secret.
What happened?
You don't know.
No. I am saying that
your Thakur Vishwajan
the Thakur you made
the five Pratimas
actually happened
in your
1991 or 1992
after our first Pratima came.
After our first Pratima came.
The first Pratima came in 1990
from Kumartoli.
After the first Pratima came
the Welsh Pujo committee gave the Pratima
to your Pratima
in 1992 or 1993.
I don't know exactly.
But you don't know
that your Pratima is in Vishwajan?
No. I don't know.
Nobody told me.
That is in my mind.
There is a
mystery.
What do you say?
Here you go.
All my documents
are here.
Okay. You have your documents.
I will see.
You see.
No, no, no.
I will see.
I will see the pictures.
It will look very good.
Tell me.
Who are you talking about?
Who was the Pujo then?
And you don't know
about the Pujo now.
I don't know about the Pujo.
I am saying that
what is the difference between
the Pujo and the Hindu Pujo?
What is the difference?
Tell me about the other Pujo.
I know that Kamal Da
you have
been involved in the Hindu
Cultural Association
which is a temple
in Kadip.
You were involved in the Pujo.
For the first few years.
Tell me about that.
How did you get involved?
I will show you.
Hindu Culture.
Tell me about that.
That was
a challenge.
Tell me about that challenge.
The challenge was
before I came here
I started the Pujo
in Leeds.
I started the Pujo in Leeds.
The
seat.
The cardiff.
You started the Pujo
in Leeds
before the cardiff?
Before the cardiff.
Before 1974.
I am saying
that you have been involved in the Hindu
Cultural Association for 2-3 years.
You have been involved in the Hindu
In India Centre.
Tell me about that.
What is your experience?
That is
the attempt.
That was your
attempt.
I have been involved in
the Hindu Cultural Association
in London.
I have fought with them.
That was my experience.
I don't know
anything about Pujo.
I have written about it.
The first time
the Pujo started in
the Centre.
Did someone else come from
London?
That was the
Pujo.
Not that.
One more.
One minute.
Kamal, you said
that the first
canvas, pot
was the picture.
Can you tell a bit more about
that canvas?
How did it arrive in
Cardiff?
Last year
Aasajada Pujo
started.
Parade.
That canvas
I went to Aasajada's house.
I asked
who else came and everyone said
me. There were two people.
There were two people
and I knew some people.
I told Aasajada
to worship you.
I forgot all that.
So, your
pot
picture, the canvas
was made in London
or was it from India?
It was from India.
Did Mr. Sarkar
do the research?
No.
Sarkar did the research.
Many people came after him.
So, that painting
was made in Pujo
to be your portrait.
Your portrait was replaced.
Yes, it was replaced.
So, the portrait you made
where did you get the information
about clay and these?
The clay you used...
Listen.
I
went to Kolkata.
In Kumatoli
for a few days
I stayed
with him.
By the way
Did you get training?
I got training.
This is a new news.
From him
I went to Kolkata.
In Kumatoli.
It was difficult to sell one piece.
It was difficult.
I had to pay
for it.
So, I stayed
with him
for a year
or a month.
Did you do it during
your holiday time?
No.
I was on leave from office.
I was on leave for a year.
It was not a second.
So, I went to India.
I went to India.
I went to Kumatoli.
I stayed there for a month.
Then I saw how they made it.
How they made it.
I learned
the things I had learned.
Then
I brought
the cloths.
Now it is in my garage.
It is in my house.
There are
grass and flowers.
Then I brought the cloths.
The cloths.
They broke.
Or they
prayed.
They did this.
They were not ready.
But I saw
the cloths
and bought them.
The cloths
and the grass.
It was difficult to get the grass.
It was very difficult
to get the grass.
I brought the
cloths and the grass.
I took rest.
Actually
I was
on leave.
I had
a plan.
I made a cloth.
I will make a cloth.
I will do
whatever I can.
I did that.
In the garage.
You did it yesterday.
I did it yesterday.
That month.
Your
Mohananda Maharaj
His disciple
in Kabindy
He did
this.
He said Kamal, you do this.
Let me do this.
Why?
He said
that my devotee
will do
this.
He said
that I have no fault in making a cloth.
I have no fault.
I will understand.
You will make the cloth.
The fault is mine.
Then I made the cloth.
Did it take time
to make the cloth?
Did it take time?
Then in London,
in Kalibati,
I brought the cloth
and made the cloth.
I gave 25 paise.
I don't know
where it went.
The Kalithakur
that you made
was in Coventry.
It was in Midlands.
The Kalithakur.
There was one Kalithakur
that
we worshiped.
And that
Kalithakur
was made
by you.
Because we
had won the Kalithakur in Kolkata.
Before that
there was another Kalithakur
that was in Karda's house.
That Kalithakur was made by you.
Because no one else can make Kalithakur in Cardiff.
I was the first
to make it
with soil
in my own hands.
In your own hands.
In my own hands.
And what else?
I made a sieve.
The sieve came to Karda's house.
In Karda's house
the sieve
was made by the Hindu
and the Hindu worshipers.
So I made a sieve.
I have done many things
but I don't feel sad.
Those
things
have
been in my mind
that I want Thakur
but not Kamal Ghat.
I don't want it.
Okay.
You
in this ancient Durga Puja
Wales
what was happening then
and what is happening now
I know you don't know about the Puja.
In this ancient subject
do you have any words?
In my ancient subject
I missed Samudas
Samudas
he is my
I left him
for gambling
I left him for gambling
You had a roommate
right?
Yes. I had a roommate
and he went to Swan Seat
he ran away from me.
So there
there
he saw an ambulance
ambulance
he got up
and he was killed
Yes.
So
Samudas
did nothing.
But after Samudas
after he died you were in Puja
many days.
You were in Puja many days.
Yes.
But after Samudas
I went to his house
I showed it to his parents
I showed it to his brother
his brother was the head of the
metal arts department
head of the movement
I went
to his house
then
this
Nandhi
what does he do on television?
Which Nandhi?
Not Nandhi
Palith
Nick Palith
Nick Palith is
Jennifer
and
Srirang Sripalith's son
Yes.
Srirang Sripalith was
with you at first, right?
Yes. Srirang Sripalith was
I showed him from his house
then
Srirang Sripalith
There were some more
who were with you at first
in Puja
Srirang Sripalith was
Anandamistra
and Ashi Thaldar was
Hey Vishwa
Ashi Thaldar
was not
Ashi Thaldar came later
came later
and Mr. Kaur was
Kaur was
Purobori
and
Kishor Sharma
or Rabina Ryan
were not there at first
No, they were not there at first
came later
Ok
Ok Kamal da
Thank you very much
You gave us a lot of information
and reminded us of many
old stories
We got many new pictures
from your house
We scanned them
and the final product
which you gave in the interview
we will print it and give it to you
Ok. Thank you Kamal da